geo_downloader
==============
Download NCBI GEO study data as "clean" text files.

Example Use
-----------

    python script.py gse_id=GSE15745 platform_id=GPL6104 outdir=$HOME/Desktop

Script Parameters
-----------

* gse_id: [required] str of GEO GSE Study Accession ID (uppercase)
* platform_id: str of GEO GPL Platform Accession ID;
    required only when multiple platforms are associated with the same study
* outdir: str of path to output directory. Defaults to current working directory.

About
-----------

GEO Downloader fetches "series matrix" data files from the [NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO)](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/)
public database as easy to work with plain text files. Matrices are aligned so that rows in
the probes (GPL platform definition) matrix align with corresponding rows in the data matrix, and
columns in the samples (GSM sample attribute and metadata) matrix align with corresponding columns
in the data matrix. The data matrix itself is saved in three forms: raw, normed, and numpy normed.
See Table 1.
    
GEO Downloader uses the GEO API and thus, by proxy, the CACHE_DIR operating system
environment variable. If CACHE_DIR is not set, GEO Downloader sets CACHE_DIR equal
to the output directory `outdir.` Any file downloaded from the Internet will be saved
into CACHE_DIR as a temporary file. 


### Figure 1: Matrix Alignments ###

             +---------+
             | samples |
    +--------+ --------+
    | probes |  data   |
    +--------+---------+


### Table 1: Output Files ###
`name = "%s_%s" % (gse_id, g.platform.id)`
_saved to `outdir`, full file name is generated by substituting `%s` with `name`_

Name | File Suffix | Matrix  | Type               | Notes |
---- | ----------- | ------  | ----               | ----- |
data | %s.seriesmatrix.tab     | data    | tab delimited text | Concatenated series matrix data without numerical transformations. First line begins with '#' and lists corresponding column sample GSM ids. First column is row attribute (probe) ID, all other columns are attribute values. Value and missing value formats depend on the source series matrix data as downloaded from the GEO FTP server. |
probes | %s.probes.tab  | probes  | tab delimited text | Platform "GPL" probe definition per probe in data row order. First line is column header. |
samples | %s.samples.tab | samples | tab delimited text | All sample "GSM" attributes with at least two unique values in data column order. Attributes with only one value are included as '##' prefixed headers at the top of the file. The line after any "##" headers that starts with "GSM_ID" is the matrix header and lists each column's assoicated, unique GEO GSM IDs. The first column is the attribute name which uniquely identifies each row. All other columns are attribute values corresponding to GSM samples in column order. |
varlist | %s.varlist.txt  | data  | text | List of probe (row variable) names in row order from top to bottom, one per line. |
gpl_brief | %s.gpl_brief.txt  | probes  | SOFT text | GPL metadata file "Brief" as downloaded from the GEO website; no row descriptions. |
